---
layout: post
title:  "SimCity : Electronic Arts"
category: "games"
---

# Lessons from SimCity

SimCity is an open-ended city-building video game series currently owned by Electronic Arts. 

According to Wikipedia

> SimCity titles are real-time management and construction simulators. Across most titles, the player (acting as mayor) is given a blank map to begin and must expand the city with the budget provided. As the city matures, the player may be able to add government and other special buildings (such as a mayor's house or courthouse), depending on how large the city is. Proper management of the city requires citizens to be provided with basic utilities (electricity, water and sometimes waste management) along with public services such as health, education, safety, parks and leisure facilities. These are provided by building relevant buildings or infrastructure, with each building covering a circular "range" in its vicinity. Inadequate funding of these services can lead to strikes or even urban decline.
> 

> The primary source of income is taxation, though some income can also be generated by legalizing gambling or placing certain "special" buildings such as military bases or federal prisons. The player may also make deals with neighbouring cities to sell or buy services, as long as a connection is made to the neighbour for that service, such as electricity cables. The player may also have to deal with disasters, such as fires and tornadoes, or fictional crises such as monster attacks. SimCity titles are predominantly single-player games, with a few exceptions, including the "Network Edition" of SimCity 2000, the Unix port of the original SimCity, and SimCity (2013).[4] SimCity 4 also provided a limited form of multiplayer gaming with the ability to share regional maps and cities with other players, allowing players to collaborate, but not to interact in real-time gameplay.[5][6][7]
> 

> Depending on the title, there may scenarios with city performance-related goals and time limits in which to complete them.
> 

I started playing SimCity a few months back and found it very interesting in the ways it asks us to develop cities. Zoom out of the game and one can correlate a lot of the lessons from the game to general economics.

### External Trade

As I got hooked to the game, I realised the most scarce commodity to build a city is not wood, nails, stone or any other material product but time itself. It's a race against time to make space for a growing city and provide for the people’s growing aspirations, if you lose this race, you lose people and the tax revenue they bring which enables further growth. The number of factories and the number of products that they can produce are all limited and the currency for production here is time. For eg., to produce a bar of steel costs a wait of 3 minutes, a log of wood takes 5 minutes for production and a finished product like a hammer takes both of these and another 14 minutes. That’s a minimum of 19 minutes wait to manufacture a hammer if the raw materials are produced in parallel. Easy way out is to buy a hammer from another city and if that’s not available buy the raw materials from another city. The cost to buy will soon be over compensated by the extra tax revenue that the growing city would bring. The cost can also be paid for by selling items to other cities that weren’t required by our own city. Manufacturing for export leads to utilisation of factory time when there’s no domestic demand for the factories products.

One may rely on just the domestic production to meet the city’s growing needs, but that costs time. 😉

### Decentralised management

Managing supply by different factories of different products across the value chain to different consumers is boring and inefficient. It's a very good thing that in real life we have open markets where buyers and sellers can talk to each other directly and the market determines supply and demand. Had the APIs for the gameplay for cities been exposed, I would have preferred automating matching supply and demand, and removed the time it takes me manually to take stock of the products in demand, available slots in factories and assign load to them.

### Credit

Capacity expansion for growth, if funded only by tax revenue, can take really long to take off here is where loans can come in. Credit is a good feature suggestion for the game 😜 Its very obvious to borrow money to fund expansion of a city when the return on investment is guaranteed.

## Summary

1. External trade - both import and export enhance growth
2. Open and direct markets boost efficiency
3. Credit helps fund growth

Of course, these learnings come from the game where prices for items are preset instead of sellers and buyers, but the game can be considered as a good proxy.